Conduct
=======


General  
-------

As an instructor, I do what I can to ensure that the classroom is a place
conducive to learning.  For the most part, common sense provides a guideline
for determining what is conducive, as opposed to disruptive.

I am generally quite nice.  Using humor, games, candy, and stickers, I prefer
to take a positive approach to ensuring an atmosphere conducive to learning.
However, if I detect a threat to such an atmosphere, I will terminate that
threat quickly, dispassionately, and permanently.



Talking
-------

When I am speaking at the front of the room, I will ask that you remain silent.
This is for the sake of the students around you as well as my own.   If you
wish to interject a comment, I ask that you raise your hand, so that I may find
the best place to close on a point (certainly not because I'm old-fashioned!).



Questions
---------

Let me begin by saying that I do not mean to discourage you from asking
questions in general.  A single relevant, insightful question asked with the
intent to promote education is one of the best things you can do to leave a
positive impression on a professor.  It is, in fact, the very hallmark of an
atmosphere conducive to learning to enable such questions, and thus I encourage
you to.

However--and I am rather radical among academics in saying this--I do believe
there are stupid questions.  These are questions which have been defiled into
tools which disrupt learning.  They come in two varieties.

The first is a flurry of superficial questions, particularly about factual
matters covered in the text or the notes.  In its worst incarnation, one
student monopolizes class time for attention by means of such questions.
Please do not do this.  If you have read the material, then have a series of
honest questions about it, come see me in my office.  In that case, I do not
mind.

The second is a question which is *weaponized*, asked with the intent to
belittle either the instructor/professor, other students, or simply for the
purpose of posturing.  Those without conscience do this because they think it
is fun.  Contrarily, I think it is fun to tell them to get out of my class.

You can assume that when you ask a question, I will precisely intuit your
intent. 



Tact and Attitude
-----------------

Be tactful and show respect to your fellow students and teachers.  If you have
a legitimite problem, then more often than not, a tactful and well-considered
assertion of your stance can solve it, or at least move you toward a solution.

I do not tolerate the "trolling" of my class, whether in a private or public
sphere.  That includes posturing, inflammatory comments, series of petty
objections, the weaponization of questions, obscene gestures, and crude or
inappropriate humor.  

If a student does troll my class, I will tell them to get over their personal
insecurities and get out of my class.



Sleeping
--------

Personally, I do not care if you sleep, but only if you are at the back of the
classroom and cannot be seen by other students, and otherwise do not disrupt me
or them.

If you fall asleep within sight of other students, or you snore or make other
noise, or if in any other way your sleeping disrupts me or other students, I
will ask you to leave.



Lateness
--------

If you choose to come in late, then do so as discreetly as possible. 



Cell phones
-----------

Phones should be put on silent mode.  I personally do not mind if you check it
discreetly, but if it distracts me or other students I will ask you to handle
it or leave.


Emotional Outbursts
-------------------

If you have an emotional outburst in my class for any reason, I will ask you to
leave as discreetly as possible.  These outbursts include uncontrollable
crying, angry outbursts, unstoppable laughter, or unchecked hyperactivity.  I
do not mean to be unsympathetic, but the integrity of my class environment
comes first.



Panhandling for Grades
----------------------

I do not respond to emotional manipulation to raise your grades.  If you are
nice, the only thing you can expect in return is a warm smile and an honest
demeanor.  If you furiously complain about your grade for no legitimate reason,
I will ask you to leave.  If you cry and beg in my office for treatment you do
not deserve, then I will drink your tears.

The only way you will raise your grade is by doing the work required.

