General Grading Policy
======================

Problems may be itemized (broken into parts).  Each coding item counts for no,
half, or full credit.  If an item is not a coding item (e.g. short answer), or
if it is worth only 1 point, then it earns either no credit or full credit.
The point count for each item/problem is indicated in-line in brackets
following the item description.  The following problem is not itemized:

 [4] Write a Hello, world! program. Call the program ``hello.cpp``.

Thus a solution code earns either 0, 2, or 4 points. The following problem is
itemized:

 [4] Write a Hello, world! program [2]. Be sure to remember to put a courtesy
 newline [1], and make the total code <=5 lines [1]. Call the program
 ``hello.cpp``.

In the itemized problem, 2 points are awarded for a program which compiles and
produces correct output; 1 point for the newline, and 1 point for meeting the
length requirement. (In this case, half-credit for the [2] points might be
given if something other than "Hello, world!" is printed.)

Problem-constraints may be assignment-wide (e.g., "All code files submitted for
this assignment must be at most 60 lines long and at most 80 columns wide"); in
this case the constraint is applied to each problem. Such constraints will be
stated at the beginning of an assignment specification.



Homework
--------

By default, a solution code earns **no credit** if: the code does not compile
using the tools present *on the server*, the code is submitted past deadline,
the code does not answer the question, or the file is not named correctly (even
if off by one character).  


A solution code, or an item of the solution code,  earns **half credit** if:
the code has a logical or run-time error, the code does not meet problem
constraints, or the code is illegible or has inconsistent style.

In all other cases, the code earns **full credit**.  In the special case that a
code is plagiarized (from on-line, a classmate, a previous student of the
course), the total assignment will earn no credit, and a referral will be
processed with Student Advocacy & Accountability.

If you are in doubt what a solution code would earn, you are free to ask.


Deadlines
~~~~~~~~~

Deadlines are strict.  The deadline for all homework assignments is 6:00:00.000
PM on Sunday.  If the homework is even a millisecond late, it will receive a
zero, even if it is perfect.  

Note that I stop answering e-mail well before the homework deadline, which
means that you are left to your own devices after 4:00 PM on Friday.  Knowing
this, you are expected to take the necessary precautions to ensure your
success.



Worksheets and Tests
--------------------

A solution code earns **full credit** if it is both syntactically and logically
correct, **half credit** if it is either syntactically or logically correct,
and **no credit** otherwise.  Syntactically correct means the solution compiles
without errors. Logically correct means the solution satisfies the problem
constraints and produces correct output.  Also, if a solution code is
syntactically correct but not substantive, it earns no credit. Thus an
otherwise correct code with a missing semicolon (syntax error) as well as an
otherwise correct code with an off-by-one error (logic error) both earn
half-credit.



Disputes
--------

You must settle grading disputes no more than one week after the assignment has
been handed back.  If you wait longer than that, the grade will remain as-is in
my gradebook, no matter how egregious the discrepancy is, or where the fault
lies.

Disputes should be made in writing, by e-mail; or they should be handled in my
office.  They should not be made before, during, or after class, or after an
assignment is handed back.

Proof is required for a dispute to be considered.  You must cite either the
rubric (to prove the problem was not graded according to the rubric) or the
textbook (to prove your answer is correct).  You must give specific wording
from the rubric or the textbook.



Excuses
-------

I only take university-approved excuses for homework as per PS-22.  You need
appropriate documentation: an obituary for a death in the immediate family, a
doctor's note for illness, an affadavit for participating in a
university-sanctioned event, or a subpoena for court-imposed legal obligations.
I follow up on excuses to verify that they are legitimate.

Immediate family includes: parents, siblings, children, spouses, aunts, uncles,
cousins, and cohabitants.  If your name is not mentioned in the obituary
("survived by..."), then you bear the burden of proving a familial
relationship.  If a cohabitant has died, you must prove that person resided at
your address at the time of death.

I do not accept power outages or technological failures as valid excuses,
unless they are caused by region-wide severe weather events.  Last but not
least--if you cannot prove it, *it did not happen*, even if it is a
university-approved excuse!

